esm: add gotcha to documentation (#32237)
nodejs/node: doc/api/esm.md

## Differences Between ES Modules and CommonJS

### Absolute file paths don't work on Windows

> Note that `import` accepts _absolute specifiers_. These are similar to _absolute paths_ on linux and MacOS, and therefore they are also accepted. But on Windows, importing an _absolute path_ to a file will not work. Therefore, to ensure cross platform compatibility, be sure to turn your file paths into urls, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `import` accepts _absolute specifiers_. These are similar to
_absolute paths_ on linux and MacOS, and therefore they are also accepted.
But on Windows, importing an _absolute path_ to a file will not work.
To ensure cross platform compatibility, file paths should be converted into
URLS.
```

Wrapping at <=80 chars, and avoid use of `your`

```
import { pathToFileURL } from 'url';

> const fileUrl = pathToFileURL(...your path here...).href;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const fileUrl = pathToFileURL('c:\\some\\path\\here').href;
```

Better to have an actual path. This won't fail linting either.

Reviewer 2: **ESM** requires the file extension:
```suggestion
const fileUrl = pathToFileURL('c:\\some\\path\\here.js').href;
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const fileUrl = pathToFileURL('c:\\path\\to\\file.js').href;
```

## Differences Between ES Modules and CommonJS

> ### Absolute file paths don't work on Windows

Reviewer 4: We already have a section on module specifiers in the "Terminology" section above. I'd rather we move this note into that section along with the description of module specifiers, than as a specific difference between CJS and ESM.

Strictly speaking, yes it is a difference, but I think to try keep the docs organized we should keep sections together.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense. But this note does need to specifically mention Windows, for Ctrl+F compatibility. My idea was that platform differences belonged in a "gotchas" type section. 

But I'm new to writing the node.js docs. Would you rather have it up by the "specifiers" section?

Reviewer 4: Ok I can get behind having this section be a specific compat issue section.

Can we change the title then to:

```suggestion
### File URLs not file paths
```

and move it to after the extensions section, since that should probably still come first.

Then perhaps with the description, we can get straight to the problem rather than having it in the title:

```
On Windows, importing file paths will not throw since the drive letter is interpreted
as a URL protocol. Instead a URL conversion is needed...
```

or something like that?

Reviewer 6: if you're importing a path, conversion is always needed!

Reviewer 5: I'm concerned that's a bit backwards; I would prefer to catch Windows' users eyes with the title, to make sure they understand it's an important section. And then go into the technical reasons about _why_ it doesnt work for them in the body.

But again, I'm new here. Is your method more inline with how the docs are typically worded?

Reviewer 5: > if you're importing a path, conversion is always needed!

That's not the current state of implementation (v13.11.0). On MacOS importing a file path works fine. The docs it says that `Specifiers may not begin with / or //. These are reserved for potential future use. The root of the current volume may be referenced via file:///.`. But that doesn't seem to be the case.

Probably due to what we discussed in https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/31710

Reviewer 6: @lulzmachine that's just getting lucky because relative url parsing happens to align with unix paths. if you know you have a path, you should *always* use `pathToFileURL`.

Reviewer 5: Ok. My primary concern was to bring the documentation in line with experience for Windows users (and for makers of libraries supporting Windows).

Another way to resolve this issue seems to be to change the implementation of ES Modules in node.js to enforce the specifiers not allowing a starting char of '/'. And to change this documentation PR to one that is general for both MacOS and Windows ("File URLs not file paths"). But I'm not the right person for changing the c-code, I'm afraid.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 6: it is valid for a relative url to start with `/` and i don't see any reason to limit that. In terms of changes to the runtime, adding a more detailed error message in ERR_UNSUPPORTED_ESM_URL_SCHEME when the scheme is a single letter might help.

Reviewer 4: Agree for the windows-specific bug, adding more context to the error message would be preferable. Then to keep the docs changes here in line with the suggestion above to provide the more general advice since this is not Windows-specific information (eg there are other character encoding issues that apply for all platforms).

Reviewer 5: That would be a really good way to highlight the error when it happens. Definitely a good change!

Regarding absolute file paths when running on MacOS. Can we put some code to detect if the user is trying to do absolute path imports, and warn them that this is unsupported? Like comparing the fileToUrl() output with "file://" + specifier to see if it's the same?

Right now there's the issue of library creators using `import()` in unsupported ways. For libraries that auto-import files, it's likely that they will implement loading on MacOS, find that absolute paths work (by luck) and ship that. Which causes errors for Windows users.

This already happened with `jest` and `babel`. But I'm sure more lower-profile projects will follow, resulting in undetected non-platform-independent libraries on npm.

I think that there is an expectation that you can produce platform-independent code by sticking with the built in functions (except for the obvious ones like `child_process` and some `fs` functions). And I would like to explore what possibilities there are to keep it that way

Reviewer 7: The last subsection of the “Differences between ES Modules and CommonJS” section is “URL-based paths”. I think that the warning should go in there, either inside that section or in a new section after it.

All the other gotchas are platform-agnostic, and therefore more important than something Windows-specific (since they affect everyone, not just Windows users). I understand that Windows users are a majority of all users, but absolute paths are also not _that_ common of a use case; when combining both a gotcha that doesn’t affect everyone with a feature that isn’t that commonly used (absolute paths), I think it should go near the end of the list.

`import` accepts _absolute specifiers_. These are similar to _absolute paths_
on linux and MacOS, and therefore they are also accepted.
But on Windows, importing an _absolute path_ to a file will not work.
To ensure cross platform compatibility, file paths should be converted into

> URLs.

Reviewer 7: As a matter of style, the Node docs avoid italics/unnecessary emphasis whenever possible.

```js
import { pathToFileURL } from 'url';

> const fileUrl = pathToFileURL('c:\\path\\to\\file.js').href;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const fileUrl = pathToFileURL('C:\\path\\to\\file.js').href;
```

uppercase is necessary. We are using `C:` everywhere else in those docs.

related PR: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/32294

> await import(fileUrl)

Reviewer 2: This should have a semicolon:
```suggestion
await import(fileUrl);
```

> await import(fileUrl);

Reviewer 3: example:

```suggestion
(async function() {
  await import(fileUrl);
})();
```

Reviewer 5: I feel the code snipped should be short and to the point. An iife is a bit distracting. Maybe adding a ".then(...)" instead of await?

Reviewer 3: good

> await import(fileUrl);

Reviewer 4: Maybe add a comment above noting what the value of `fileUrl` is:

```js
// file:///c:/path/to/file.js
```

or similar, just so it is clear what is happening.
